# 808 animation

🚨 _You can run this markdown file directly with the coldtype command line tool: `coldtype examples/animations/808.md`_ 🚨 

For this animation, we'll need the standard coldtype library as well as some optional bits, the `MidiReader` and the `warp_fn` from the warping library.

```python
from coldtype import *
from coldtype.animation.midi import MidiReader
from coldtype.warping import warp_fn
```

Though it’s not necessary to load the font directly from the `.designspace` file (since we could always load an actual variable ttf file), it is fun to demonstrate.

```python
obvs = Font("assets/ColdtypeObviously.designspace")
```

Here the `MidiReader` comes into play — this is a class that parses midi files and converts the native time values to more useful frame-based time-values, based on a frame-per-second (`fps`) value.

This is also useful to load before the render function, because this MIDI data doesn’t change once our program is loaded.

```python
drums = MidiReader("examples/animations/media/808.mid", duration=120, bpm=120, fps=30)[0]
```

I like to keep things like logos in UFO source files, since they aren’t really typographic, so you don’t need to load them as fonts. Here we load a ufo of logos via `DefconFont`, which makes keyed lookups of vectors very easy.

```python
logos = DefconFont("assets/logos.ufo")
```

OK, here’s the main render function. To start this off, we'll define variables for `kick` and `cowbell`, since we'll be referencing those when we build the initial text lockup in the next code block.

The `fv` method is a little cryptic, but we’re looking for `(f)rame-(v)alues` for given MIDI notes, the `[36]` and `[47]` respectively. (Drumkits in Ableton Live usually begin on 36, so that’s usually where you’ll find the kick when reading a MIDI file generated by Ableton.)

```python
@animation(duration=drums.duration, bg=0.2, storyboard=[105])
def drummachine(f):
    kick = drums.fv(f.i, [36], [5, 50])
    cowbell = drums.fv(f.i, [47], [15, 75])
```

Now we can build the initial `Style` specification, using the MIDI values for kick and cowbell to control the tracking (`tu`), and the `wdth` of the variable font, via the `.ease()` function available on the object returned from an `.fv` call.

We can also re-kern the T/Y for this particular use, since the text is so big, and when it gets stroked later on, we can avoid having a too-large visual mass in the composition. (Also it’s fun to demonstrate that you can easily re-kern fonts with the `kp=` keyword and a dictionary of glyph-name pairs. (`kp` stands for kern-pairs.))

```python
    style = Style(obvs,
        390,
        tu=-150+550*cowbell.ease(),
        wdth=1-cowbell.ease()*0.75,
        ro=1,
        r=1,
        kp={"T/Y":-25})
```

Now with the `style` variable settled, we can construct a multi-line text lockup with the `Composer` class, by passing in a rectangle to hold the lockup, then the text itself, and the style object we created above.

We can also set the leading of the multi-line setting here, by specifying `leading=` as a function of the kick signal.

```python
    pens = (Composer(f.a.r,
        "COLD\nTYPE",
        style,
        leading=math.floor(10+kick.ease()*50))
        .pens()
        .align(f.a.r))
```

So now we’ve got the lockup, and we move from _building_ the text to _messing_ with it, since we converted from the "text" realm to the "vector" realm with that `.pens()` call above. This is analogous to hitting "Convert to Outlines" in Illustrator (except in this case, if we want to change the text later, it’s easy).

Anyway, the point is now we have a hierarchical representation of the text that we can query and modify, kind of like manipulating a DOM via css or js if you're familiar with web tech.

To start, let’s visualize the snare hits by shearing the line composition & rotating the two letters that correspond to where the snares hit in an 8-count. That's a fancy way of saying, the eight letters here correspond to the 8 eighth-notes in the bar, so we want to modify letters 3 and 7 (aka `P` and `L`), which correspond to the snare hits.

A few notes:

- `ffg` stands for `find-first-glyph`, which finds the first glyph with the given name. So we want to find the L in the first line of text, that’s `pens[0].ffg("L")`; we want to find the P on the second line, that’s `pens[1].ffg("P")`, etc.

- `mod_contour` allows you to modify a nested pen value in-place as a set of contours with a callback function (aka a `lambda`). Basically, the `mod_contour` function first "explodes" the glyph into all its component contours (in the P’s case, that’s the outer shape & the counter shape), and then gives you an opportunity to modify just the specified contour before reassembling the contours into the letter (so the counter is still a counter and not just another filled-in shape). That’s how we’re able to keep the counter of the P frozen in place. If we got rid of the `mod_contour` call and instead rotated the P glyph itself (ala `pens[1].ffg("P").rotate(rim.ease()*-270)`), then the counter shape would also rotate.


```python
    snare = drums.fv(f.i, [40], [10, 40])
    se = snare.ease()

    if snare.count == 1: # the first snare hit
        pens[0].translate(-150*se, 0)
        pens[1].translate(150*se, 0)
        pens[0].ffg("L").rotate(se*-270)
    else: # the second snare hit
        pens[0].translate(150*se, 0)
        pens[1].translate(-150*se, 0)
        (pens[1]
            .ffg("P")
            .mod_contour(0, lambda c:
                c.rotate(snare.ease()*270)))
```

Whew, ok that was a little complicated. Now let’s do something similar with `mod_contour` on the P, but this time rotate just the counter shape when the second rimshot hits (we can ignore the first rimshot b/c it hits at the same time as a hi-hat, which we'll visualize in a second).

```python
    rim = drums.fv(f.i, [39], [5, 5])
    if rim.count == 2:
        (pens[1]
            .ffg("P")
            .mod_contour(1, lambda c:
                c.rotate(rim.ease()*-270)))
```

Wouldn’t it be cool if the letters corresponding to the kicks scaled up whenever the kick hit? That’s what’s happening here, along with a more programmer-y idiom, i.e. unpacking a tuple to the `line, glyph`. This is just a way of abbreviating a longer `if-else` statement that would contain redundant code.

```python
    line, glyph = (0, "C") if kick.count == 1 else (1, "Y")
    (pens[line]
        .ffg(glyph)
        .scale(1+0.5*kick.ease()))
```

OK, on to the hi-hats. Here we get the hat signal from the midi, with an even preverb-reverb (that’s the `[10, 10]` bit), because we want to mimic the regular action of a drummer hitting a hi-hat.

```python 
    hat = drums.fv(f.i, [43], [10, 10])
```

When the first hat hits, let’s move the counter in the O to the right.

```python
    if hat.count == 1:
        (pens[0]
            .ffg("O")
            .mod_contour(1, lambda c:
                c.translate(80*hat.ease(), 0)))
```

And when the second hat hits, let’s move the counter of the D in the first line, this time translating it down & then rotating it, to make it seem like it’s falling and then bouncing back up from the bottom of the outer shape.

```python 
    elif hat.count == 2:
        (pens[0]
            .ffg("D")
            .mod_contour(1,
                lambda c: (c
                    .translate(-30*hat.ease(), -100*hat.ease())
                    .rotate(hat.ease()*110))))
```

And when the third and fourth hats hit, let’s move the left and right sides of the T crossbar, via the `map_points` function, which lets you adjust the x and y values of a shape directly via a callback.

```python
    elif hat.count in [3, 4]:
        
        def move_t_top(idx, x, y):
            if hat.count == 3 and 0 <= idx <= 6:
                return x-150*hat.ease(), y
            elif hat.count == 4 and 22 <= idx <= 30:
                return x+150*hat.ease(), y

        pens[1].ffg("T").map_points(move_t_top)
```

Ok last hat! Here we exaggerate the horizontality of the E counters with the same `map_points` function.

```python
    elif hat.count == 5:
        
        def move_e_contour(idx, x, y):
            if 9 <= idx <= 13 or 20 <= idx <= 25:
                x -= 75*hat.ease()
            return x, y
        
        pens[1].ffg("E").map_points(move_e_contour)
```

The last visualization is the tom-tom hit. Here we can just nudge up the outer contour of the O in the first line.

```python
    tom = drums.fv(f.i, [50], [5, 10])
    (pens[0]
        .ffg("O")
        .mod_contour(0, lambda c:
            c.translate(0, -80*tom.ease())))
```

And a little branding: load the Goodhertz logo from the ufo via `glyph` and apply a `nonlinear_transform` to it, using the `warp_fn` helper. This lets you quickly & easily apply a "wavey" Perlin noise transformation. To be honest I barely understand how it works, but it looks cool.

```python
    fp = f.a.prg(f.i, easefn="linear").e
    ghz_logo = (DATPen()
        .glyph(logos["goodhertz_logo_2019"])
        .scale(0.2)
        .align(f.a.r, y="mny")
        .translate(0, 100)
        .nonlinear_transform(warp_fn(speed=fp*3, rz=3, mult=10))
        .skew(cowbell.ease()*1))
```

Now we return the data we’ve manipulated to the renderer. This is also where we apply the finishing touches to the `COLD\nTYPE` lockup, by reversing the lines so that the the first line is last (meaning it shows up on top, which is nice for when the C gets really big), and then by applying an `understroke`, which interleaves stroked copies of each letter in the composition, giving us a classic look that we can hit with a high-contrast `phototype` simulation. And then we’re done!

```python
    return DATPenSet([
        (DATPen()
            .rect(f.a.r)
            .f(Gradient.V(f.a.r,
                hsl(0.58, 0.55, 0.5),
                hsl(0.65, 0.55, 0.5)))
            .f(0)),
        ghz_logo.f(hsl(0.9, 0.55, 0.5)),
        (pens.f(1)
            .reversePens()
            .translate(0, 100)
            .pmap(lambda i, p: 
                (p.flatten(3).nlt(warp_fn(f.i*10, f.i*10, mult=30)))
            .understroke(s=0, sw=15)
            .phototype(SkiaPen,
                f.a.r.scale(2),
                blur=5, cut=190, cutw=8,
                context=__CONTEXT__,
                fill=1))])
```